**[!] This project has been moved [here](http://github.com/amirrajan/rubymotion-applied). Report bugs and contribute to the projects specified in the README.md within the rubymotion-applied repository.**


= RubyMotion

RubyMotion is a commercial toolchain for iOS, OS X and Android development using the
Ruby programming language.

This repository contains the parts of the RubyMotion product that are
opensource. It does not contain the full product, which can be purchased at
http://www.rubymotion.com.

== Contents

The +lib+ directory contains the project Rakefile library and the build system.

These files are installed as +/Library/RubyMotion/lib+.

In order to use the GitHub version of these files in your RubyMotion project,
you can run the following commands.

  $ git clone https://github.com/HipByte/RubyMotion.git
  $ cd RubyMotion
  $ git submodule update --init
  $ rake install

+/Library/RubyMotion/lib+ is replaced with +lib+ of git repository,
then you can use this in your RubyMotion app.

When you would like to go back to original installation,
you can run +rake uninstall+ within directory of git repository.

  $ rake uninstall
  
---------------

If you are looking to modify the +motion+ command itself, you'll need to mimick your existing +/usr/bin/motion+

An easy way is to just make a copy somewhere on your $PATH and use that for testing

  $ sudo cp /usr/bin/motion /usr/bin/motionme

Edit +motionme+ and point the $motion_libdir variable at your local git repo.
  $motion_libdir = '/Absolute/Path/To/Forked/RubyMotion/lib/'
  
Now using +motionme+ instead of +motion+ will use the forked RubyMotion

== Report a bug

We stopped GitHub issue tracker because we have our main issue tracker in http://hipbyte.myjetbrains.com/youtrack/issues.
If you would find a bug, please report it using "motion support" command. Then we will filed issue in our issue tracker properly.

== Contributions

Please use the GitHub pull-request mechanism to submit contributions.

== License

  Copyright (c) 2012, HipByte SPRL and contributors
  All rights reserved.

  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
     list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
     this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
     and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
  ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
  DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
  ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
  (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
  LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
  ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
  (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
  SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
