h1. Welcome!

Thanks for purchasing RubyMotion. This guide will help you getting started with the product.

h2. Overview

"RubyMotion":http://www.rubymotion.com is a toolchain that permits the development of iOS applications using the Ruby programming language.

"iOS":http://www.apple.com/ios is Apple's mobile operating system, powering a variety of devices such as iPhone, iPod touch and iPad. Developers can write applications for iOS and submit them to the App Store, Apple's application distribution system.

Conceptually, RubyMotion is a combination of three components:

* *Runtime*: a brand-new implementation of the Ruby language, tightly integrated with the native iOS runtime and optimized for embedded iOS devices constrains.
* *Tool*: a command-line interface to create, manage and interactively develop RubyMotion projects. It also includes a static compiler that compiles Ruby into optimized machine code, and a fully-functional debugger.
* *Library*: a set of high-level Ruby libraries sitting on top of the iOS SDK that greatly facilitates the development of applications. Each library covers a commonly used pattern, such as UI elements building, XML/JSON parsing, data persistence, and more.

RubyMotion installs itself into +/Library/Motion+. A symbolic link to the command-line interface is created as +/usr/bin/motion+.

h2. License Activation

You should have received an email with your purchase that contains a 40 hexadecimal characters license key. The key can be used to activate RubyMotion. Product activation is mandatory in order to receive software updates or file support tickets.

<pre>
$ sudo motion activate <license-key...>
</pre>

h2. Software Updates

Software updates can be applied via the command-line.

<pre>
$ sudo motion update
</pre>

This command will grab the latest version of RubyMotion from the network and install it. You must be connected to the Internet to perform that command.

You can always see the version number of the version of RubyMotion installed on the computer.

<pre>
$ motion -v
1.0
</pre>

Once a day, the RubyMotion build system pings the software update server in order to see if a new version of RubyMotion is available to install, and accordingly prints a message on your terminal, suggesting you to upgrade.

h2. Support

If you are experiencing an issue, would like to request a feature, or simply have a question, you can file out a support ticket from the command-line too.

<pre>
$ motion support
</pre>

h2. Hello World

We are now ready to write our first RubyMotion program: Hello World.

Open your terminal and go to a place where you would like this first project to be created, then type the following command.

<pre>
$ motion create Hello
</pre>

This command will create a RubyMotion project in a new directory, called Hello. If this directory already exists or cannot be created, the command will fail.

Let's have a look inside.

<pre>
$ cd Hello
$ ls
Rakefile app resources spec
</pre>

A RubyMotion project is +Rakefile+-based. +rake+ is the de-facto Ruby build program. It is similar to +make+ and it ships with Mac OS X by default.

The +app+ directory contains the application code. The +resources+ directory will eventually contain the resource files of your project, such as icon, image or sound files. The +spec+ directory contains specification/test files.

Let's run the default task.

<pre>
$ rake
</pre>

This should build our project then start the simulator, and you should see... an empty, black window. It's actually normal, we haven't written any code yet!

If you look inside the +app+ directory you will see an +app_delegate.rb+ file, which is created by default. This file implements the +AppDelegate+ class, which is responsible to control your application. 

<pre>
class AppDelegate
  def application(application, didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:launchOptions)
    true
  end
end
</pre>

Open the +app/app_delegate.rb+ file with your favorite editor. We will change the code to do something more interesting, such as triggering an alert.

<pre>
class AppDelegate
  def application(application, didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:launchOptions)
    alert = UIAlertView.new
    alert.message = "Hello World!"
    alert.show
    true
  end
end
</pre>

If you run the +rake+ command again from the terminal, you should be able to see the alert in the simulator.

Now, let's try this outside the simulator. Make sure you have an iOS device properly configured for development connected over USB, and type the following.

<pre>
$ rake device
</pre>

This should install the Hello app on your device. You can now pick it up and run the app, and you should be able to see the alert message.

Congratulations, you successfully created your first RubyMotion program. That wasn't too hard, wasn't it?

h2. And Now?

The "/Library/Motion/sample":file:///Library/Motion/sample directory contains sample code. Each of these is a RubyMotion project as described above, you can type +rake+ from their directory to build and run them.

The "/Library/Motion/doc":file:///Library/Motion/doc directory contains guides about the platform. You will find there essential information about the runtime and the project management interface.

Check out the "Developer Center":http://www.rubymotion.com/devcenter for more resources. You will find there tutorials and screencasts.
